# Hurricane-Evacuation-Route-Planning

For our final term project, Rohit and I were asked to create an AI model from what we have learned in our Intro to Artificial Intelligence course at the University of New Haven. We decided to tackle this task by using hurricane data in Louisiana from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to create a hurricane route planning model. We then collaborated and thought it would interesting to see the difference between the uniform cost search (UCS) and the a star (A*) search methods. So, we implemented both of them into our project.

Rohit and I started the project off by creating a detailed overview of how this hurricane route planning model would function to get our end goal via powerpoint. In the beginning of the powerpoint, we explain the importance of hurricane route planning as certain search methods are more safe to use than others. We then share our objectives, approach and deliverables, where we explain how we got the data, what methods we are implementing, and show comparrisons between the two search methods.

Next, the search methods we decided to choose was the UCS and A* search. We give a breif descriptive on why these two search methods are great choices for our project. We shared that the UCS is important because: It expands nodes in order of lowest cumulative cost so far, it's suitable when we don't have a heuristic, and it guarantees optimal path when step costs are positive. But, A* search is also important because: It uses "cost so far" + heuristic, has a Heuristic: Euclidean distance to the safe zone, and is much faster because the search is guided.

So, when creating the code for this, we thought it was important for us the show a comparison table, giving an easy visualization about the total path cost, nodes expanded, path length, and total runtime. We also wanted create different graphs, such as a: comparison table between UCS and A* search, heatmap of the storm density, storm event distribution, 3D surface plot of the hazard grid, comparison of the evacuation routes between UCS and A* search, cost path evolution graph, and the 15 regions where the most storms happen. A lot of these graphs were quite intriguing. For example, the UCS and A* search in both the comparison of the evacuation routes and cost path evolution graph were identical.

We took a further look at the comparison table and we had some observations that we found interesting. We found that the total cost path for both searching methods was 170.53, making both paths optimal when dealing with cost. For the nodes expanded and path length, the UCS and A* search were also the same at 171 and 171. However, when we looked at the total runtime we can see that A* search was faster than UCS, where A* search was 52.72ms and UCS was 75.42ms. The big difference between these two methods was the heuristic. A* search was optimal overall since this method includes a heuristic, as UCS does not. Thus, A* search is the safer path.

In conclusion, both Rohit and I were able to collect storm data from the NOAA and successfully use it for our analysis in our project model. We also used our knowlege from DSCI 6612 to implement UCS and A* search into our project as well, figuring out which path is the most optimal evacuation path. While UCS and A* search were both identical when looking at the visual graphs, A* search outperformed UCS in efficiency. This framework that we created can be used in real-world hurricane route planning using the data from the NOAA.

~ Jacob Demmons and Rohit Kumar Sah
